New Techniques for Purification of Septstones
Author: Relvanis Thalbar
Date: 235/7800/34

Introduction

As is common knowledge at this point all magic consists of manipulation of the six elements from which the universe and all contained within are composed of. For more details on Magic, its origin and common practices I direct the reader to "Studies in the Elements" by ???? which is the foremost scroll concerning a broad veiw of the foundations of magic. This thesis will attempt to summarize the history of, use of, and making of septstones. 

A septstone is an elemental stone of power which can be used to increase control of or imbue an object with a particular element. This may seem like too broad of a statement however history has shown that while there have been many attempts to produce them, only one method has proved successful enough to be considered a true septstone. 

History

The first septstone was created many generations ago, the precise date has been lost in the intervening years. It was discovered by a largely discredited researcher at the College of Alrond by the name of Gederis. Gederis was surprisingly far ahead of his time and proposed many theories which were later verified but during most of his career he was rediculed for them. Among these theories he was the first to describe the world in terms of the 6 elements leading to modern understanding of our world. He also postulated about the existance of other planes of reality and the fact that bridges might be opened to them. This was eventually proved in the form of portal magic but only 39,000 years after his death. He also devised a co-ordinate scheme for his postulated other planes which is used even today. On of his unproved theories is that of a unique origin. To this date, no one has sucessfully opened a portal to this so called origin and many in the academic community believe it to not exist theorizing that a plane in perfect balance with all the elements could not possibly exist as it would be too unstable. Though I have no evidence of this, I personally believe that Gederis was correct about too many other things that doubting this does not make sense. Its possible that if the origin exists we just have not been able to access it through normal means.

Despite being discredited and generally shunned in the academic community for the majority of his life, Gederis was resolute in proving his theories were true and set his life's work into experimentation with the elements inherent in the world to prove they could exist as individual entities. This is where his work on Septstones began and would consume him for the greater part of his life.

One of the key discoveries that Gederis made was of a particular type of gemstone known today as Septimium and his highly valued and rare but back then was considered a waste product of the mines in the north of Aleris. Gederis at this point had developed techniques for imbuing various objects with elemental characteristics but all of the materials were too weak to contain large concentrations of any particular element. This resulted in many minor disasters but also inadvertently has opened up the domain of magical study known as artifice.

The weakness of the materials he was working with is what led him to journey to the northern mines as he had in his search found out about an extremely hard material the miners found in the mountains there. Septimium as it would become known turned out to be the break Gederis needed, though it would still take him several hundred years before mastering the purification and transfer techniques.


Basics

This section covers the basics of septstone creation techniques. Later sections will deal with details of the techniques listed here.
Septstone work is a vastly complex area of study but there are two fundamental rules which are easy to state

1) When creating a septstone, the concentration of elements in the stone are equal to the concentrations of the plane it is imbued in.
2) When purifying a septstone, the maximum concentration obtainable for any particular element is 1.1 times the concentration of the starting materials. This is known as Daryl's constant and is related to the elemental conductivity of septimium.

In this thesis I will summarize previous work and then describe a set up through which I was able to obtain a maximum concentration of 1.423 times the alignment using new applications of portal magic as well as a repeated amplication technique.


Septstone Creation

Septstones creation begins with obtaining a pure sample of Septimium. While Septimium gems with flaws may be used, their capacity will be severely diminished. For a beginner however working with impure samples should be fine as long as they attempt only fairly weak septstone creation. More powerful attempts will lead to the crystal failing in a most catastrophic manner. Raw Septimium has a brownish muddy translucent appearence which is part of the reason it was considered waste by the miners. The gem has sheer lines which allow it to be easily hewned into a elongated octahedron. The recommended dimensions for optimal Septstone is in the rand of 6-8 cm long and 4 cm in width. Not only is this an easy size to work with but studies have shown that these dimensions give maximal capacity with minimum of dilution effect observed in larger crystals (See "Optimal Septimium Techniques" by Forvin).

The muddy appearance of raw septimium is due to the mix of elements contained in it. Septimium from Aleris is formed at equilibrium with the alignment of Aleris. Though Septimium has never been observed having been formed in any other plane, it is the prevalent theory that if it did, those would also in thier raw form share the alignment of the plane. Septimium in its raw form is mostly useless. You can use it to directly distill out one particular element, however due to Aleris's alignment which is not particularly extreme in any dimension, this method produces rather weak stones. Once again excellent for a beginner who is not yet ready for septimium purification techniques which are required for more advanced stones.

The reason directly distilling Septimium results in weaker stones is due to the fact that when distilling the total concentration of elements goes down, so while you may obtain increasingly pure stone of one element, the result is diluted by the compinents removed. As a result advanced septstone creation techniques which Gederis started and was perfected by his lone student Tolwin, is to begin by removing all components from the septimium. This technique is highly complex and requires creating local fields devoid of a particular element and forcing the septstone into it. This process is generally made easier if you have something for the elemental components to enter. Another septstone is preferable due to its high conductivity, however lesser materials may be used in the early stages. For maximum purity septstone-septone connections must be made however. This means in the production of a pure septstone, one must use a large number of auxillary stones in the final purification steps. This is a time consuming process and can easily take upwards of a year for a master to produce just one stone. The difficulty is that if at any time one of your fields collapses, the stone will become re-contaminated. 

Usage of field manipulation rings can aid in this process as they are made from elemental insulators which allows you to interact with the stone without contaminating it and also aids in the maintanence of a clean environment. Great care must be used however when working with these devices as it is extremely easy to forget where the field is and come into contact with it which can cause imbalances in the worker's own alignment in the best cases, death in the worst.

After purifying the stone it will appear completely transparent. The final stages of purification are too subtle to determine visually and must use either an accute sense of the alignment of the stone or specialized detection equiptment. Dispite advances in this technology, the native sense of alignment by a master septstone worker far exceeds the precision of any tool. In this state the stone is in a state of vacumn. If exposed to any element it will absorb it. However if exposed simply to a planes alignment you will end back where you started. You must filter the desired element into the stone. The easiest manner by which to do this is to use a second stone (the purity of this stone does not much matter as one uses it as a conductor) in combination with a field one create a filter which allows you to bring in just one element into the stone. As with most of this process this must be done with care especially during the lowering of the exclusion field of the element you wish to create. If performed incorrectly you can corrupt the stone. In this state the purified stone is highly fragile also which is part of the reason that flawless septimium must be used before attempting this proceedure.

When the filter has been set up correctly and brought in contact with the empty stone, a rapid colour change will be displayed. Each element has its own colour, Ignis appears as a ruby with a glow of a ember at its center, Terra is emerald green the surface glows with a dark forest green core, Aer looks like a topaz with a mesmerizing flow inside, Aqua is an ocean blue with seemingly endless depth to it. Finally Ordinieum has an almost metalic orange appearance. As of the writing of this thesis, a perfect septstone of Discordia has never been created for reasons I will explain in the next section. What few attempts there have been in creating one have always resulted in the destruction of the stone itself. We do however know from these attempts that such a stone if possible to create would likely take a dark purple colour with a core of magenta.


Refinement/Amplification

Following the first rule of Septstones creation stones created in this manner, while of a pure element can not exceed the concentration of that element in the plane it was created. This is almost true except for the second rule which says they can be refined to 1.423 times this concentration. This is achieved through a relatively new technique first established by Daryl in his book "The art of Septstone refinement". Daryl exploits a subtle effect during the transfering stage of Septstone creation, when the stone is imbued with its element. It was found that the flow of the elemental components through the filter was not steady. Infact it was observed that this rate is positive even when the target crystal was at equilibrium. This small amount of "overshoot" allows for higher concentrations to be obtained but is limited by the ability to conduct from the environment fast enough. Daryl's work introduced locally feeding elements into one side of the filter to boost this effect up to 1.423 times the alignment concentration. 

At this point it is natural to ask "If we can concentrate an element in a particular region why not directly imbue the stone in this manner". This method has been tried but has proved impossible without the use of a filter to produce a clean stone. Without the purity of the element it seems the stones potency rapidly drops off. As such, Daryl's technique has become the defacto manner in which septstone potency is increased. Often with multiple practitioners gathered to manipulate the various parts of this set up.

The other obvious route for obtaining more potent septstones post the discovery of portal magic is to perform the creation in another plane with particularly high concentrations of the element you care about. This is a vary dangerous method to tackle as it of course requires the maker to travel to a possibly highly unstable plane not fit for habitation. Not to mention the dangers the plane naturally holds.


Further Refinement

Finally for the topic of my these research in particular. My work has devised a method which can bypass the limitations that Daryl's technique imposed, though at the cost of drastically more resources. The set up is as follows. Construct a septstone in the traditional manner of the element you are trying to imbue it with. The higher purity this initial stone has the fewer iterations the following process will require. As such using a portal to a highly representative plane would be the way to go. To limit the dangers of this technique, we do not actually enter the plane instead we open the portal and place the filter crystal part way through allowing conduction from the other side. On this side we follow the normal protocols. This has the added advantage of an easier time setting up the exclusion fields as the behaviour of them are far more predictable. For my thesis work I connected to a moderately high ignis plane (0.1, 0.1, 0.2, 0.4, 0.5, 0) in the Gederis co-ordinate system. Note that this is below the threshold for even theoretically creating a maximally pure ignis Septstone which has never been completed due to instabilities at the higher concentrations.

From this plane I purified eight 0.5 ignis Septstones created through the normal manner into four 0.75 ignis septstones. The process used to do this exploits a property I discovered during the transference proceedure. I had begun my experiments by trying to feed the filtering step with already created septstones of lesser quality due to the high conductance property I had hoped to improve the reliability of Daryl's technique, however during this experimentation I tried feeding the process with two such septstones through separate filters. I expected for the rate from each stone to be approximately half and for it to make no difference. However I was surprised to read that the rate was far above that rate at about 0.75 the normal rate through one. It seemed that the flow from each stone was inducing the flow in the other, amplifying the affect. Startled by this the resulting stones from these experiments were already exceeded Daryl's limit. Through much more experimenting I discovered that the strength of the induction effect was purportional to the concentration of the input crystals.

This technique even worked with lower concentration crystals down to about 0.2 (below which if there was an effect it was very minor) but in addition one crystal of higher quality could be used to drive another of lesser quality to still result in an improvement of the output. I suspect that the reason for non-perfect conversion is some back pressure which partially counteracts the inducing force. However with higher quality. and stones of equal quality this effect is minimized. One exception being that a stone of very high quality with a stone of very low quality, the inductance seems to be incapable of overcoming the back pressure to the weaker stone and you end up with two stones of lesser quality. this trait was observed for a 0.7 stone and a 0.15 stone. 

Also the effect seemed to be amplified for set ups using more then two input stones. Though when doing this the back pressure seems to increase drastically requiring the input stones to be in far narrower of a range of quality.

Using this technique once more on the four remaining 0.75 stones from the first iteration but with all four feeding into one I obtained an ignis stone of such high quality that it is indistinguishable from pure. Some of the more philosophical collegues of mine argue that you couls never create a completely pure septstone of any type without opening a portal directly to (0,0,0,0,1,0) commonly known as Valcor. It is doubtful that any techniques we use would even function on that plane let alone even have the crystal maintain intergrity there which they point to as further evidence that this gem can not possibly be perfect. And that may very well be the case. However I see very little difference between a stone indistinguishable from pure and a pure one. In either case I submit this stone (of which I must admit I am somewhat afraid) and this thesis to the College for consideration of completion of my degree in the higher magics

- Relvanis 