Mythology/Origins of Magic in Elduin.md, before:

Origins of Magic in Elduin

Order - Ordinieum - Ord
Chaos - Discordia - Dis

Water - Aqua   - Vi
Earth - Terra  - Te
Fire  - Ignis  - Ig
Air   - Aeris  - Ae

Magic was not native to Elduin before the Elves arrived. Elduin's plane alignment was predominantly Order, followed by Water, Earth then Fire. As a result Elduin was a world dominated by Natural laws and as a result was devoid of any significant magic. This is not to say that there were not those who could weild the elements inherent in the world. Druids who use the elements contained in the world to perform thier "magic" had some limited capability. Without access to significant amounts of Chaos the Natural laws can not be broken. As a result "Druids" were more similar to wisened rangers of the lands. Possessing heightened knowledge of the nature of the physical realm (Some were said even to be able to move their conciousness into the  spirtitual realm through use of particular herbs). They typically showed up as medicine men, herbal healers, sooth sayers. The highly skilled were capable of encouraging growth of plants, learning secrets to disguise oneself, or even very rarely have slight manipulation of the pure elements. The latter individuals would be little more then fire-breathers and tricksters.

Of course manipulation of the elements directly is not the only way to perform great deeds. Before the elves arrived there were nations of men on other continents of Elduin as well as to the north. Worship of dieties was quite common amoung men. Sometimes this was worship of members of the Yalvori, and sometimes members of the Yalvori would impersonate deities. In either of these cases, occassionally the Yalvori would grant miracles to devote folowers. For those members of the Yalvori who partook in these kinds of activities generally did so out of their own self interest. Granting miracles in exchange for the clerics to spread worship of them.

Not all Yalvori interacted in this manner. Some who cared for those plane dwellers would take an unassuming form. Instead of granting miracles or the power to grant miracles, These Yalvori would instead guide from within. An often thankless position but these Yalvori did not require thanks. History is riddled with stories of mysterious figures who appear at times of crisis, nameless, just descriptions such as "The Old Man" or "The Beauty".

Until the coming of the elves, these were the only sources of what might be known as "magics". This all changed when Elves fled Aleris to Elduin. The portal they opened let in more then the fleeing elves. Despite best precautions on the part of the elves, considering the nature of Aleris upon their escape, a considerable amount of chaos was introduced into Elduin. Even with the quick sealing of the portal after entering, Elduin's alignment had started shifting, A process which would continue for millenium. Increasingly chaos was becoming more prevalent in Elduin and with it the ability to defy the natural laws. Hence true magic was introduced to Elduin.

The study of magic among the Elves remained largely unchanged from the practices in Aleris, though Portal magic beyond the basics was no longer taught (for obvious reasons). Among humans, those who were already aware of the nature of the components of the world were the first to notice the shift. The druids not only noticed the introduction of more chaos, but over time they learned how to control it. The wisest of these magic men would teach handful of students in the craft. Over the generations, these became the Magician schools. 

When the peace treaty was established between the elves and men, A school was formed for all practitioners and the elves taught of the nature of magics.

There is one final source of magic and magic beings in Elduin. Originally Elduin was home to only the Dwarves, Men and Mer people. The shift of Elduin's alignment had a second effect which would not be noticed for some time. Elduin, for the first time since the sharding of the planes, was moving. When planes move through the interdimensional space, they occassionally collide with other planes. As the border between planes gets thinner, occassionally things leak through.

It was through this that many of the other beings came to inhabit Elduin. Orcs, Creatures of the Fey, Goblins to list some of the lesser nuisances. As time progressed more darker things bled through creatures of immense power or dark intent. Vampires?? Dragons and the like. The reaction from some of the lesser educated beings is to blame either the elves or the magicians and magic itself. (Anti-magic faction, and templar knights group of magic weilders against these beings?) Some of these beings possessed the ability to manipulate the elements within and outside of themselves intrinsically. Mortals who obtain their power from these beings became sorcerers.

(Potential plot ideas)
Elduin is moving towards a balanced location with even amounts of Chaos and Order, Between this and the fact that this plane has connected with more then any other brings it to the forefront of the conflict between Poredok and Anfren. Profecy of the time that the balance is reached? Potentially come in contact with Yalvor? Who knows about that. Yalvor was not meant to be reached but maybe that is some fruitful ground for good plotlines?

Commit message:

Update Origins of Magic in Elduin.md
Clarified? the definition of magic in the early universe, changed druids to sages as druid seems to imply only the 4 physical elements.

Mythology/Origins of Magic in Elduin.md, after:

Origins of Magic in Elduin

Universal essences/elements:
Order - Ordinieum - Ord
Chaos - Discordia - Dis
Water - Aqua   - Vi
Earth - Terra  - Te
Fire  - Ignis  - Ig
Air   - Aeris  - Ae

Magic: The manipulation of the universal essences/elements to perform tasks that would be otherwise impossible by the current plane of exsistance. NB In ordered planes, magic===chaos as it is needed to disrupt the natural order.

Magic was not native to Elduin before the Elves arrived. Elduin's plane alignment was predominantly Order, but all the other essences exsisted in some amount. As a result, Elduin was a world dominated by Natural laws and was devoid of any significant amount of chaos. Access to significant amounts of Chaos was needed to upset the natural order and manipulate the other elements, resulting in what would later be called "magic" in Elduin. It is only by leveraging the right balance of the elements that can result in some control of the universe. Eventually, species arose in Elduin who had hightened understanding of all the elements inherent in the world. Sages who studied the elements contained in the world had some limited capability to interact with the world that to others seemed like "magic". Analogous to wisened rangers of the lands, these individuals possessed heightened knowledge of the nature of the physical realm. They typically showed up as medicine men, herbal healers, or sooth sayers. The highly skilled were capable of encouraging growth of plants, learning secrets to disguise oneself, or very rarely slight manipulation of the pure elements. The latter individuals would be little more then fire-breathers and tricksters. 
   

Of course manipulation of the elements directly is not the only way to perform great deeds. Before the elves arrived there were nations of men on other continents of Elduin as well as to the north. Worship of dieties was quite common amoung men. Sometimes this was worship of members of the Yalvori, and sometimes members of the Yalvori would impersonate deities. In either of these cases, occassionally the Yalvori would grant miracles to devote folowers. Those members of the Yalvori who partook in these kinds of activities generally did so out of their own self-interest. They would grant miracles to individuals (called clerics) in exchange for evangelizing their worship.

Not all Yalvori interacted in this manner. Some who cared for those plane dwellers would take an unassuming form. Instead of granting miracles, these Yalvori would instead guide from within. An often thankless position, but these Yalvori did not require thanks. History is riddled with stories of mysterious figures who appear at times of crisis, with descriptions such as "The Old Man" or "The Beauty".

Until the coming of the elves, these were the only sources of what might be known as "magics". This all changed when Elves fled Aleris to Elduin. The portal they opened let in more then the fleeing elves. Despite best precautions on the part of the elves, considering the nature of Aleris upon their escape, a considerable amount of chaos was introduced into Elduin. Even with the quick sealing of the portal after entering, Elduin's alignment had started shifting, A process which would continue for millenium. Increasingly chaos was becoming more prevalent in Elduin and with it the ability to defy the natural laws. Hence true magic was introduced to Elduin.

The study of magic among the Elves remained largely unchanged from the practices in Aleris, though Portal magic beyond the basics was no longer taught (for obvious reasons). Among humans, those who were already aware of the nature of the components of the world were the first to notice the shift. The sages not only noticed the introduction of more chaos, but over time they learned how to control it. The wisest of these magic men would teach handful of students in the craft. Over the generations, these became the Magician schools. 

When the peace treaty was established between the elves and men, A school was formed for all practitioners and the elves taught of the nature of magics.

There is one final source of magic and magic beings in Elduin. Originally Elduin was home to only the Dwarves, Men and Mer people. The shift of Elduin's alignment had a second effect which would not be noticed for some time. Elduin, for the first time since the sharding of the planes, was moving. When planes move through the interdimensional space, they occassionally collide with other planes. As the border between planes gets thinner, occassionally things leak through.

It was through this that many of the other beings came to inhabit Elduin. Orcs, Creatures of the Fey, Goblins to list some of the lesser nuisances. As time progressed more darker things bled through creatures of immense power or dark intent. Vampires?? Dragons and the like. The reaction from some of the lesser educated beings is to blame either the elves or the magicians and magic itself. (Anti-magic faction, and templar knights group of magic weilders against these beings?) Some of these beings possessed the ability to manipulate the elements within and outside of themselves intrinsically. Mortals who obtain their power from these beings became sorcerers.

(Potential plot ideas)
Elduin is moving towards a balanced location with even amounts of Chaos and Order, Between this and the fact that this plane has connected with more then any other brings it to the forefront of the conflict between Poredok and Anfren. Profecy of the time that the balance is reached? Potentially come in contact with Yalvor? Who knows about that. Yalvor was not meant to be reached but maybe that is some fruitful ground for good plotlines?
