On Planes and Interdimensional Geometry

It is believed amoung the elves that in the beginning there was nothing. A unity that permiated all existance.

Then at the very first moments of anything that could be considered the universe, this unity was fractured. It is fiercely debated amoung elven scholars and philosophers as to whether the universe was always fractured or if this event was caused by a force beyond understanding. What is generally agreed upon is that this fracturing set up the structure of all material and immaterial planes of existence.

Amoung most of the other sentient races including humans it is believed that Good and Evil are the fundamental components of the universe. The elves know this to be a misconception. After the fracturing the two predominant forces which split were those of Order and Chaos. The tension caused by this separation further fractured the new found vaccum at the center. From this vaccum split off the four elementals. From then on the structure of everything was composed of various strengths of each of these fundamental components. This six elements of nature form an elongated octahedron which the elves hold as a symbol of the all existance.

These fractured components began coalescing into regions of the octahedron based on their components. Seven Regions of concentrated essences, the four elementals, Order, Chaos, and at the very middle where there was perfect balance of all of the other six was a region of harmony of the elements. From each of these regions there arose a powerful being composed of, derived from and representative of each of the primal regions. Seven in total, these beings are collectively known as the Primals. Though they do not often co-operate, Lindale, the Seventh being of harmony created the first Plane, though extremely alien to what would be considered a material plane by most, for a time all the Primals resided here in Yalvor. During this time the Primals created together many powerful beings (though none as powerful as even the Elementals, the least powerful of the Primals). The precise number of these beings known collectively as the Yalvori is unknown. But handfuls of them later take an interest in some of the material planes and their inhabitants.

As idellic and Yalvor was, The Primals found that they could not stand being in the same plane. So one by one they each went off to create a plane purely of their domain. Each one purely composed of the component they embraced. These planes lie at the outer most points of the universe. Lindale grew bored of this static situation and as a result started a seris of experiments in creating new material planes. With the co-operation of the four elementals, which were less opposed to collaboration, they created some of the most incredible planes to have ever existed. Five of these planes they created but without either chaos or order they were static and unmoving.   

The Lindale managed to get Poredok (The Primal of order) to add order to some of these planes and Anfren (The Primal of Chaos) to add his component to others, however the result was always disappointing. Poredok and Anfren where never used together because those two beings refused to co-operate. It is said that one day Lindale devised a scheme in order to get both Poredok and Anfren into a world together. He had the Elementals construct the most magnificent world they could and then he offered a competition to both. The one who made this world the most incredible would win it for themselves. Neither wanting to be undone poured all of their effort into this single world. When they were done Lindale looked at the world and was pleased for it was filled with life and vibrance.

Both Poredok and Anfren demanded that Lindale choose a winner. Instead Lindale took that world and broke it into a thousand shards and scattered them into the octahedron. Each one formed a new plane of existence, each with slightly different balance of components. These pieces filled out the octahedron according to alignment. Both Anfren and Poredok were furious and with thier combined power trapped Lindale in the first plane Yalvor. They both then tried to collect the pieces and rebuild the plane. But neither of them were powerful enough to undo what had been done. Instead they settled into their own dimensions watching the planes and interfering when it suited them. Each believing that if they could control enough of the pieces that they would become powerful enough to reunite the whole.

The Elementals understood the Lindale's goals but not even combined were they strong enough to confront either Poredok or Anfren, nor could they free Lindale so they and the Yalvori took to monitoring the realms and their inhabitants. Sometimes trying to keep balance, some times trying to stir things up.

In between the planes of existance is the primordial soup of existance. It is believed be some that when you die you move into a fuzzy image of your plane that surrounds your material realm. Right on the edge as your plane melds into the primordial ether.

These are the beliefs of the Elves who have done the most travelling between realms. Their realm had more chaos then average and as such Magic (which derives from Chaos) was stronger in Aleris. Elduin was originally more blanced towards Order and as such was ruled primarily by the Natural laws... That is until the Catastrophe of Aleris and the Elves creating a portal to Elduin shifted the Balance of the elements in Elduin and introduced magic.


The seven Primals do not themselves have names however the elves do have names for them.

The four Elementals are by far the least powerful of the Primals, Even combined there powers do not compare to Poredak or Anfren. The Elementals are:

Fiore (Fee-or-ray) - Domain of Fire, Fiore is a tempermental being, quick to anger but also extremely passionate. She tends to side with Anfren and is generally disinterested in the material planes choosing instead to primarily reside in the plane of Fire, Valcor. The messenger for Fiore is the pheonix and has the symbol of three upward lines. One of the few beings she does pay attention to are the Dwarves of Elduin who worship her as Velni - Mother Mountain.

Vesi - Domain of Water, Vesi is a very rational being, sometimes unpredictable and quick to change his mind but always having a reason for his actions. WhenVesi has made a judgement however his wrath can be ferocious. The one thing Vesi is irrational about is his attraction to Fiore (Who generally ignore him). Vesi Does take interest in in the marine life in many planes, teaching the dolphins to speak and is a worshipped by the merpeople. Vesi's plane is known as Ujya (oo-ya), The messenger for Vesi is the Albatross and has a spiral as his symbol.

Zeme - Domain of Earth and Solidity, Zeme is best described as a slow being. Taking his time to decide anything and often choosing to not make a decision at all. He rarely forms allegiances and is generally oblivious to the going ons of the other Primals. He takes no interest in the material planes despite being the one who gave them solid form. Those of the Yalvori who are closest to him, who generally take the form of golems in the material realms have been known to interact and are the only reason he is known. He never has reason to send a messenger so its unknown what form it would take. His symbol is the upwards pointing triangle. He has no worshippers and instead resides in his domain of Toke. In general he leans slightly towards Poredok but does not really take part.

Ilma - Domain of Air, Ilma is both very similar and very different from Zeme. Like Zeme, Ilma does appear to be overly concerned about any of the material planes or other Primals. She jumps around the realms as she pleases and is generally flighty. She gets bored easily and will often change what she is doing at the tip of a hat. Extremely unreliable she also does not have any worshippers. nor does she have a messenger instead choosing to appear herself if the fancy strikes her. The only plane and beings she spends any lengthy amount of time is in the Fey with the pixies who very much share her flightiness. Her home plane is Ajor though she spends very little time there. Her symbol is a lopsided figure eight.

Poredok and Anfren are lesser known to the material planes consumed by their desire to create better worlds through expression of thier own component. They are bitter rivals who reside each in their own planes. For Anfren, being of chaos, this is Frantor and for Poredok, being of Order, this is Cartibe. Combined their power is equal to that of Lindale. However they never see past their differences. A variety of the Yalvori are aligned with each of them though in general the Elementals steer clear of their feud.

Finally Lindale, The balanced one. Lindale is unique in the ability to harness all of the components of the universe, each to a lesser extent then its respective being, but with these abilities combined, Lindale is easily the strongest of the Primals. His domain is Yalvor in which he has been trapped in, frozen in time from the combined fury of Poredok and Anfren at the shattering of the planes.